ald brothers and sisters tonight
inshallah is a new topic from a very
good topic for our time
called and the word ha is an Arabic word
which is mentioned in the Quran and also
in the many hadiths and it is one of the
core values and characteristics and one
of the branches of Ean branches of true
faith faith and of a
Muslim ha generally before I Define it
in detail I'm just going to share a
couple of stories to set the scene but
ha in general in simple words is a
combination in English of what we say
modesty
self-respect
bashfulness having a moral conscience
and acting upon on
it and it comes from the meaning of
life so the more a
person a more a person's heart is full
of
life the more your modesty and your
sense of right and
wrong becomes important to
you and the less life you have
and the more unaware a person's heart
is the less modesty shame bashfulness
self-respect a person
has so I'll share with you two little
stories just to set the scene inshallah
both of them are true stories that
happened to me the first one I was
sitting at a friend's Cafe
outside on the main
road the foot path outside
where they had some chairs and tables
and I saw a young a young boy a young
man maybe 14
15 running away and a security guard is
chasing him and he had stolen some
things from a
shop so I had a friend of mine who was
standing there and he stopped
him and the young boy
became
embarrassed and start started to justify
trying to say things about I didn't mean
it or I didn't take anything so a sense
of guilt sense of guilt because he got
caught and I think it must have
recognized us so he felt a bit of
shame I looked at that as a good
thing and I felt a bit
of a bit of a heart towards him
thinking we don't know his circumstances
how was he raised what family lifestyle
he may have it was a school day don't
know what he's doing outside of school
so there's a lot of things that could
have
happened so this friend of mine he went
and reconciled the situation with the
owners of the shop and he paid for the
stolen things that this boy
took he did a good deed may Allah reward
him and gave him a little bit of advice
this young boy had some friends with him
younger than him the younger friends
didn't steal anything and they said we
didn't do anything with just
following so as the young boy came back
with his friends he went past me
again and he started acting like he did
something Macho in front of his friends
swearing and saying whatever it's just
something who cares and went
off and Subhan Allah I
thought this word
ha if we can teach our children ha from
a very young age
with tenderness and with gentleness and
with wisdom and parents share their time
with their kids from a young age
teaching them what means what modesty
and the sense of right and wrong is to
feel shy when you're doing the wrong
thing and having that strong moral
compass this is what Islam is all
about this boy would not be speaking the
way he's
speaking the opposite of
ha the opposite is shame
and if a person cannot feel shame then
they don't have
modesty shame means is something that
dishonorable you do things that keep you
away from Shame Shame is a detested
thing it's not good and we shouldn't
allow shame to come to
us modesty is the opposite the prophet
sallallah alai he
said modesty
is one of the
branches of Iman of true
faith and the great Scholars of Islam
and jurists have always spoken about
this
saying every they quoted the Hadith of
the Prophet Sall alaihi wasallam saying
every religion every followers of all
other
religions they have something special
that makes their religion special to
them a characteristic that stands out
and the thing that stands out for Islam
is Modesty and the sense of a moral
compass of right and
wrong so that when I do the right thing
I feel at ease and
peace and when I do the wrong thing I
feel uneasy and
uncomfortable and I don't want people to
know this about me and I feel ashamed in
front of Allah subhanahu wa so then I
repent and I fix this is a high
beautiful quality of a believer
another story I want to share with you
is once I was sitting at the park with
my
children and as we as I'm watching my
children I saw like maybe a four or
5-year-old little
girl she's swinging on the bar on the
floor swing on the bar and this girl
wanted to swing want to do a flip over
the
bar but she was wearing a
dress and her mother's watching her of
course so the mother said to her Flip
Flip darling flip so she said but Mom
she the girl she became
bashful she said I'm wearing a dress
four or five years old non-muslim
non-muslim so the mother said to her
it's okay you're still small and so the
girl flipped and her dress went up and
down the bashfulness went
away that was a time when she and I
thought to myself Subhan Allah Prophet
wasallam is truthful and the Quran is
truthful that Allah tells us that he
created us on this instinctive
natural predisposition a an instinctive
nature that human beings if left alone
from a childhood you naturally develop
the sense of modesty and shyness in a
good
way and you don't like
shame
right so this moral compass I don't know
if some of you are parents you've seen
maybe your children growing up up at
first they'll say to you when they're 1
or 2 years old or 3 years
old they go to the toilet or they go to
the you know the the the the um the
potty or whatever and they're not very
shy at the beginning and then suddenly
they reach an Age 3 years old maybe 4
years old and suddenly they
say can you just stand outside the
door maybe they say to you look I'll
just I'll just wear the I'll put the
towel on first
this is very natural for any child and
this is called
a the Quran means the Natural Way Allah
created humans from birth we have a
natural moral modesty built inside of
us and this modesty
Islam came to nurture it and to enhance
it and to continue it and it commanded
the parents
to train their children from a young age
when they catch it to train them
on we teach them for
example that when you go to the toilet
you don't stay there for too
long we say there are impurities in
there this is part
of we tell them that when you go to the
toilet you don't share it with another
person this is called
ha we teach them privacy so we knock on
their door as they get older not because
we need their permission but we need to
role model that there are boundaries and
privacy for people and that we shouldn't
look into the
Privacy Affairs of people this is part
of we teach them in role model about
what the rights of people are what's
your right and what's their right from a
very young age this is part of modesty
and ha to know what people's rights are
and to feel
ashamed when you violate people's rights
take something that's not
yours we nurture the idea of dress codes
that as you get older you cover more and
that covering is not just because it's
cold
outside or so that you can stay safe
that's one reason but also because
dressing and covering is a moral modest
thing it's part of what the human
dignity because we are not animals we
are not like animals humans and animals
are
different we teach them that when we are
alone Allah is watching
us so
modesty what is it what is the meaning
of is as follows it is a natural
instinct of modesty and
bashfulness the character of modesty and
self-respect the closest definition that
I found which I thought is the closest
by one of the jurists is this it is an
Earnest desire
to do what is
right and
modest and a character which stops you
from doing shameful and immoral things
in private and in
public with modesty there is a sense of
well-being and pride and good sense of
oneself so we see this Natural Instinct
and modest and bashfulness in the story
of Adam and ha Adam and Eve in the
Quran and how Satan tried to lure them
into the act of
shamelessness to summarize the story you
all know but I'll remind you for those
who
reflect when Allah tells us about how he
placed Adam and his wife ha Eve in
paradise and he told them not to eat
from
a tree nothing special about that tree
but Allah wanted to teach us something
says just turn it from that tree nothing
special about
it the Shan Satan didn't care about the
tree but he wanted to take
away the sense of morality from Adam and
Eve and he does it step by
step so the Shan doesn't care what you
do what he cares about
is to take away the
sense of modesty from your heart so that
you can become indifferent indifferent
don't care what Allah says to you I
don't care if I disobey Allah anymore
once you do that you are now at the
mercy of the shatan the Shan gets a hold
of you because now you got no more
sincerity you got no more conscience of
moral morality
bashfulness no
if you do the right thing or wrong
thing and so he said to them the only
reason Allah doesn't want you to eat
from that tree is because you will live
eternally you become angels and he kept
giving him lies upon
lies the Adam and Eve had not been used
to people lying to them or things lying
to them and thean even swore by
Allah he said I swear by Allah I am
advising you they had never encountered
anybody who would even swear an oath
you know they thought because of the the
strong ha the modesty you can say they
were a little bit gullible so obviously
a Muslim has to learn about people's uh
attitudes and that's why Allah
introduces to us Shan and tells us learn
the Bad and the good not so they can
fall into the bad but so that you can
avoid the bad so learn that there is bad
in this world and we teach our children
there is bad in this world we don't draw
a picture a romantic picture for them we
tell them there are bad people and
there's bad in this world and there's
paradise and there's Ali and Ali is for
the bad people paradises with the good
people and so on so Satan he kept on
doing that until they ate from the tree
and when they ate from the tree what
happened to them something that was
unusual something you would not expect
the Quran is different to what the
current other scriptures say the Quran
says the truth and that
is their clothing came off
them and the that was covering them was
uncovered and so they became
naked what is the correlation between
nakedness and disobeying Allah with
something so small and listening to the
shatan because that's what exactly
disobeying Allah leads you to becoming
indifferent to Allah's commands opens
you to the mercy of the shatan now
shatan wants you to become immoral
indecent no modesty whatsoever don't
care about any morality right or wrong
because that is what corrupts and caus
es chaos and leads people to become evil
and leads you to Hellfire that's what
thean wants so
Allah he tells us in the Quran
[Music]
in chapter 7 ver verse 27 Allah says oh
children of Adam
all of you people oh children of Adam
let not Satan deceive you in the manner
he deceived your parents out of paradise
pulling off from them their clothing to
reveal to them their shame he and his
host surely see you from whence you do
not see them we have made satans the
Guardians of those who do not believe
now here the translation is shame but
really your body is not a shame so I
don't really like this translation of
Shame you'll find it but I left it there
to just illustrate
um shame here means that the Shan wants
you to attract shame and not
be con not be sensitive to it that's
what it means here but really it means
nakedness to show your nakedness in the
wrong place that's shameful not your
body that it's shame shameful there's no
shame in having a body there's no shame
in uh in uh being proud and happy in the
way Allah created you but being shameful
means to let your immodest let your
nakedness be seen where it shouldn't be
seen doing the thing in the wrong
place Allah also
says he said but Satan seduced him
saying Adam Adam shall I direct you to a
tree that is eternal life and an abiding
Kingdom
Allah says then the two of them ate the
fruit of that tree meaning Adam and Eve
ate from the fruit of that tree and
their naked part became revealed to each
other and they began to cover themselves
with the leaves from the gardens thus
Adam did not do what his Lord told him
and he strayed into error Allah says
thereafter his Lord exalted him accepted
his repentance and bestowed guidance
upon him you might be thinking aren't
they husband and wife in Paradise
nakedness looking at each other is that
a bad thing no no Allah says husband and
wife are like clothing garments to one
another nakedness between them is not
Haram it's not
shameful but in public in open the Shan
is there not covering yourself that's
the shameful
thing the correlation therefore between
disobeying Allah is the result of it is
immodesty lack of Shame and you become
dead in your heart no more
sensitivity nakedness no
nakedness Zena adultery
fornication uh you know stealing not
stealing acting like a lunatic acting
like an animal in front of people
swearing breaking rules backbiting all
of that becomes nothing to that person
and so they lose their Humanity they
lose their life cuz ha is Humanity ha is
life some people misunderstand this and
they say well I don't care what people
think that's a wrong thinking I don't
care I don't I don't care if people and
shame being shameful you don't get
anywhere in life that's what they say no
that's wrong don't believe that stuff
we're not talking about a person being
having low self-esteem that if you ask
them what's your name and they
go or you say uh for example you know um
you ask him a simple question and then
they don't know how to even talk no no
not like that shamefulness is to look at
what is right and wrong and have
integrity have integrity you work at a
place and you've got control over the
cash
register nobody's watching you open the
cash register your shame your your your
modesty that Allah is watching you your
instinctive nature of modesty of sense
of right and wrong will stop you from
stealing even if you can get away with
it otherwise how how is it that
people appreciate the goodness of others
how how is that people stop from killing
and murdering and harming others how is
that what stops people from doing
immodest immoral acts if it wasn't for
the sense of
modesty and detesting of
Shame so brothers and
sisters therefore shame is the opposite
of
modesty and in Arabic shame
means means disgrace dishonor when you
don't have mod modesty and self resect
you bring shame upon yourself so to
me ha to mean shame does not give the
accurate
meaning shame carries the notion that
you yourself are somehow bad or that
your body itself is
shameful uh when we cover ourselves for
example we don't do it because of shame
but because of modesty covering because
of Shame gives the impression that my
body for example itself is shameful or
bad in some way no a Muslim doesn't do
that because of
that or if I do a bad
deed uh just thinking of shame it can
make me think that I am a bad person by
nature and good for nothing and there's
no hope in me for
example so for example that boy that we
saw stealing the way we would approach
him is saying son this is not your
character and you know Allah is watching
you did the wrong thing we see our
children doing the wrong thing we don't
say you're bad you're good for nothing I
don't know why I gave birth to you you
came out wrong you're a mistake no
you're an accident we never say words
like that to our children because now we
change them into they themselves are
asham no we got to separate the two ha
means modesty they're born with it then
do the things that keep away shame and
let them know that shame is not good
covering your body is not about just for
the sake of social norms or the cold or
just for appearance it's an act of
modesty and piety when it is done in the
way that is prescribed by Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala
we often say for example the person has
no shame or have you no shame or shame
on
you what we mean by
that is uh that that person has no moral
conscience he has no sense of care to be
dishonorable no consideration to right
or wrong I don't care so what or whether
he takes people's rights or whom he
Harms in the process or not so long as
his desires feelings and wants are met
that's all that matters to this person I
do what I want and I don't care about
anyone else this is a person who is dead
in their
heart there is no modesty in that person
and we need to help them ignite
it my brothers and sisters
[Applause]
at the time
of for example he made a rule a
law he
said he found out that the people the
the businessmen were selling milk mixed
with water and tricking the people they
were fraudulent and charging people for
what seemed to be pure milk but it was
mixed with water so he made a law and a
punishment for anybody who is caught
mixing milk with water and selling it
deceiving the
buyers one day as his
normal um practice he used to walk with
his Apprentice around that
night disguised to see if anybody is in
need of anything not to catch people but
to see if anyone's in need some people
were embarrassed to come forth for
help one day he sat to rest beside a
wall after helping a woman and her kids
and he overheard someone behind the wall
of a mother and her daughter they were
preparing milk to sell the next day and
the mother mix said to her daughter mix
the milk with
water so the daughter she said didn't
you
hear the leader of the Believers has
said that now we are forbidden and
there's a punishment and her mother said
to her and where is am to see us so the
daughter says if am cannot see us can't
Allah see us sense of modesty and
went home got his son and he came back
knocked on their door and said excuse me
I am here you are the people who are
overheard before excuse me forgive me I
didn't mean it and the mother got scared
she said will never do it again he said
don't worry I'm not here to punish
you but I'm here to know about your
daughter he said what about my daughter
he
says she's an amazing person and I would
like to propose she said
proposed to my daughter he said not for
me not for me for my
son a daughter like yours should not we
should not let go of her do let her see
my son if they like each other go ahead
and truly they got married and from them
came the fifth or the sixth the seventh
khif or the
eighth so
the that is
ha we have ha modesty
in front of Allah when you're
alone and that is the highest form if no
one sees me I know that Allah sees
me we have to have in front of the
Angels the Angels watch
us and we have ha modesty with ourselves
self-respect so therefore a Muslim has
modesty in three different circumstances
in front of Allah the angels and himself
did you hear me say anything about
people here no it's got nothing to do
with people people who don't believe in
Allah who don't believe in the Hereafter
who don't believe in this unseen which
we Muslims believe in will say there's
no point of Shame what do you want with
people you get nowhere in life but we as
Muslims we have shame we have modesty
because Allah sees us because the angels
are there because of ourselves because
there is a Hereafter come because we are
created here in this world for a test
and the muslim's morals and his
character is based mostly on modesty
and and the higher it is the better you
are I bring to you the story an example
of the story of Moses
mam remember the story of Ms and the
young
ladies
in let's look at their story for a
minute because there are so so many gems
to be learned from there about
modesty Allah says about m
when he arrived at the spring of Medan
he found there a crowd of people
watering their
flocks and he found apart from them two
women holding their flocks back they're
not going forward they're holding their
flocks back
[Music]
he asked the women what is it that
troubles
[Music]
[Applause]
you they said we cannot water our flocks
until the Shepherds take their flocks
away
and our father is a very old man that's
it nothing more nothing less see these
two sentences they used they perfectly
describe a huge paragraph what are they
saying they said we will not mix with
the men because we women have a sense of
modesty in case men and women mix and
they start touching us us and we touch
them that's not a moral thing so we are
waiting until they go and then we'll go
and give our flock the water and the
reason we're out here just in case you
know our father is old so therefore we
have no other family we need to be out
here mixing with the men and and doing
these things all of this in just two
sentences do you know why they only use
such short sentences because that's also
part of modesty that they only say what
is needed and gives the meaning this m
is a handsome tall strong ly dark man is
amazingly beautiful and strong and young
and single and alone and
vulnerable and you'll find out later on
that one of these sisters they were
actually
sisters she she felt she was interested
in
him and later on he marries
her but she doesn't reveal any of that
nothing she didn't doesn't say she
turned to her sister and said I think
I'm in love
she didn't turn around and use some
words saying so what are you single
alone none of these words he did not
turn around and say anything extra to
them just what is the problem that
you're going through and he was so he's
a he was destitute he was running
away as a fugitive from the Egyptians
the Pharaoh wanted to kill him because
he had accidentally killed one of the
Egyptians and he's hungry he's starving
he's got no home home he's alone he's
sick but he only ask him what's your
trouble so he Allah says in the
[Music]
Quran he said on hearing this Moses
watered their flocks for them and then
returned in a shaded place and said my
Lord Lord I am truly in great need of
any good that you might send down to me
Allah he went back into the shade after
helping the
women and he turns to Allah subhanahu
waala my Lord I am in
need Allah
says soon thereafter one of the two
women came along came to him one came
walking to him he describes her the way
she walked to him
in such a
manner she came back walking bashfully
bashfully in the Arabic language is
taken from the word which is our topic
modesty
but when you say it that way it's more
intense it's stronger than just modesty
what
is it's
when it so she's she's
hesitating I go forward or should I go
back my modesty tells me don't take
another step at the same time there is a
need I got no other choice I got to go
forward back forward back forward then
she pushed herself to go forward that's
called so as you can see she was shy but
she didn't let her shyness Make Her Say
and do what needs to be
done at the same time she's still
showing Bash which shows modesty that
there is a boundary around her in case
Moses has a wrong idea or anyone else
that sees
her knows she is a woman that has
integrity and a boundary as you can
see but she still walked and spoke with
Integrity she said to
him my
father invites you that he may reward
you for you for your having wed our
flocks for us who invites
you our father she could have said we
would like
to indicating she's interested in him
but her modesty made her very aware of
herself and the situation she wants she
doesn't want to give the wrong
impression or idea and at the same time
she wants to have a self-dignity and if
things are ever going to develop if
there is it has to be done the right way
with her modesty and dignity intact and
protected and known
this is true true self-respect this is
true Integrity this is true
dignity this is true femininity now mam
also has modesty even stronger than hers
this man who is alone now in the middle
of nowhere and a young woman in the
middle of nowhere two single people
nobody is watching he is strong he can
he he and her can do
anything her father is an old man that
means she's got no brothers or uncles or
fathers or any any body to come out to
protect
her
yet
mam what did he
do he looked at it as Allah accepting
his Dua when he said oh Allah I am in
need he looked at this lady coming back
that Allah had sent her to make an
opening for him for
goodness so he followed her
talks about this verse and he says the
way she came to him she came to him she
had grabbed her clothes and sort of hid
part of her face as she talked to him
and then mentions go not like our women
today we're talking 1,400 years ago and
he's saying not like our women today
going here women of today they don't
care where they go and what they mix and
how they talk and how loud they are hell
quiet and these
men this is 1,400 years ago talking
about about a a woman that existed 3,000
years before that and now here we are
God help us in our society today where
do I
begin so M followed her when Moses came
to him to her father and narrated to him
the whole of his story he said the
father said have no fear you are now
safe from the inous people from the Bad
Evil
people mam
he felt a need to follow her but he did
not harm her did not talk to her in
anything did not flirt with her did not
take the opportunity for anything went
to the Father the story goes on that the
one of the sisters said oh Father oh
Father hire him to work for us the best
type of man you can hire is a
trustworthy strong man which indicates a
good quality and characteristic of a man
to marry that if he has qualities of
trustworthiness and honesty is a good
man who will look after the wife he
marries because he will not he will not
neglect his responsibilities as a
husband and father and as a son-in-law
and so on that's true masculinity to be
able to take his role and
responsibilities and that requires
trustworthiness and honesty and when
your trustworthiness and honesty is
built on modesty and built on the fact
that Allah is what ing you and you are
loyal to Allah subhana wa tala then
that's the best type of person the one
who fears Allah in secret and in open
they don't care if the authorities see
him or don't and so
on my brothers and
sisters see this characteristic there is
called
modesty this is why I didn't say it's
shame she didn't feel
shame nor was she uncomfortable in her
body in her clothing in her walking in
her
talking nor was M uncomfortable in his
talking in his body in his walking and
talking but they both had boundaries
which they stopped at he asked them he
helped them he spoke to them they spoke
back they told him she came back he went
uh followed and kept everything moral
respectful for themsel in front of Allah
and to each
other did life stop some people think oh
but if you're going to follow that path
in Islam you can't do anything I've had
young people ask me the question which I
don't know what to make of it saying why
is it haram to have a girlfriend why is
it haram to have a boyfriend why I don't
know how where has the morality gone
where has the modesty gone I mean just
instinctively naturally when you're a
little CH tiny child you already feel
something's wrong with
that you're talking about Haram
sexuality sexual behavior
here you're making law f for yourself an
opposite gender to to to do you know
sexual acts with that's what it means
how can you do that that's when the is
gone that is a sign of
gone my brothers and
sisters
uh the the
person who does not have the sense of of
of fear of Shame and so on uh
they have a special characteristic these
people who don't have the sense of shame
or modesty or what do we find in them we
find
that they have a sense of what we
call um superficial
charm four things superficial charm
which
means that they would do whatever makes
them well received by
others as opposed to what they actually
believe is right or wrong so if people
give you attention they laugh at your
joke they think you're cool you will do
the wrong thing that's a person who
lacks shame and
modesty they also have
impulsivity people who lack modesty have
impulsivity what does impulsivity mean
they do reckless things without care or
thought just says and does what their
desires tell them to do whatever their
feelings tell them and like doing with
no care of consequences on what
happens the people who don't have
modesty in them anymore they have
something called Extreme confidence
extreme confidence confidence is good
and then there's extreme confidence like
Cockiness uh and very low anxiety they
don't fear anything so there's no
thinking they also have a
cold-heartedness what is
cold-heartedness they don't care who is
watching them who they have hurt and
what boundaries they have
crossed this is a person who has no
sense of fearing shame and has no sense
of modesty no lifeless lifeless
person my brothers and sisters the
prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam was
described how was he
described the prophet alam's shyness
always showed on his face you're talking
about the most masculine strongest
integral man on the face of the Earth
The Messengers and the prophets of Allah
Muhammad s Al wasallam the final prophet
he was described as such they
said the prophet sallallah alai wasam
was more intense in his shyness than a
virgin girl that is in her
Oasis so who is going to be most
shy
right it's it's a girl who's never who's
never encountered another man she'll be
very shy right so they said Prophet
wasam was more than that in what
sense whenever he saw or encountered
someone or something around him that was
immoral someone did something that
immoral someone swore someone said
something someone did something that he
heard about someone who had done
something immoral or
wrong wasallam would close his mouth and
he could see on his cheeks redness he
would be embarrassed for that person
because that was called this is not
right and I've seen you've seen
sometimes you stand with shaks and
Scholars who fear Allah tala and maybe
you might say a joke that goes a little
bit too far and and you'll see these
Scholars were knowledgeable
right they understand what means
suddenly you know they'll just look down
and they'll they won't embarrass you but
they'll look down a bit and you think
okay this is a bit awkward I shouldn't
have said that but they won't embarrass
you and then they'll change the topic so
this is a sign of ha the characteristic
of a person with it's a good thing but
it doesn't mean you can't joke so
there's a balance in Islam please don't
misunderstand me the prophet Sall Alam
joked with his companions and with
elderly women so one day a woman came to
him and said yeah an elderly woman over
880 years old she said Yol Allah do you
know if I will enter paradise and he
said to
her no old woman will enter Paradise
he's joking with
her so she took it she took it literally
went back to her husband and he saw her
a little bit sad and when she told him
what the prophet wasallam said he
laughed and said go back and ask him
what he meant so when she went back
prophet laughed the laughter of the
Prophet wasallam by the way was never he
never produced sound Prophet either
smiled and when he smiled a lot you
could see his gums that's what that's
that's the characteristic of his
laughter that means he laughed so when
his gums sh it doesn't mean you can't
laugh
but's and modesty is unmatched so he
laughed like that and he said to her you
will enter young it means jna if you're
old you will return to your youthful Age
first and then you will enter Paradise
so no old people will enter
Paradise when he joked was always
truthful and there was always goodness
and happiness that he brought to people
so that is not IM modesty this is
actually modesty to be able to joke in a
way that benefits and brings happiness
to people is the heart of
modesty to differentiate between what's
moral and immoral to joke morally to
speak morally to dress morally to
interact morally to do business morally
to talk morally to go and come morally
as opposed to immoral keep going on with
your
life
theam saw another companion walking with
it could have been his younger brother
or his son or someone like that from the
context of the Hadith and the man was
advising the person that was with him
the younger person not to be so modest
you know too
bashful but wasam when he heard this he
said leave him leave him for modesty is
a part of IM it is a part of true Faith
this man
had an instinctive nature cuz you know
when you're born some people have a
higher sense of modesty than others
you're actually born with different
levels of this sensitivity and then as
you grow older you get raised upbringing
by your parents by your relatives by
your Society by the school by your
social media by your friends and then
that modesty either either grows or dies
out so this man had it in him andam is
telling him don't leave him as he is
he's all right he's got a strong sense
of modesty so the man was so from the
context we understand the man is trying
to tell him don't be so modest because
you won't get ahead in life people walk
over you but that's not what the Propet
wasallam means here he's saying no no no
no he has a sense of
modesty meaning that he has Integrity he
has a moral compass of right and wrong
if someone hires him is going to be
honest whether the employer is seeing or
doesn't see if he marries someone he's
going to look after their daughter if he
has children he's going to um look after
them if he has entrusted with wealth you
can trust him that is called
ha but the difference is that some
people just do it and some people have a
strong sense to do it meaning they don't
need to be told they instinctively do it
some people do it without even hearing
what's right or wrong they instinctively
do it so that strong sense is what makes
people not do fraudulent things not lie
for example uh not do bad things when
people are not
around right this is
um uh so for example once once I a long
time ago I used to work for a clothing
shop long time ago just making ends meet
while I was at Uni
and the owner of the store it was since
now black black Friday's coming up
Friday this Friday so I think it was
Black Friday or boxing day you know when
this craze about everything's going to
be half price and all that rubbish some
some of them most of them are lying to
you so I remember that time so we went
to the back into the warehouse and we
started getting all the t-shirts and the
clothing and pants and there were tags
on there like let's say
$200 we would take the tags off put
another tag that has $300 crossed out
now
$200 you know I said is this or that was
the last day I went there by the way
without saying what place that
was so a person with ha and modesty
knows that Allah is watching won't do
that won't trick people
right um so ha means when you're alone
with another gender you don't allow
yourself to be there from the beginning
you stop
that I know I I've seen young people
before my eyes mashallah I'd be filling
up petrol for example or I'm somewhere
or I'm in the car or I'm
walking we we catch each other out don't
we we see each other but some of us we
don't tell you that we we've seen you
but I love to highlight when I see good
things so you know I've seen a few of
the youngsters some of them come to this
mosque some of them go to the school
that I um used to teach at I've seen
them around right and just accidentally
I just see them for example one time I
saw a young one who I knew come past and
there was a a car outside with you know
a bunch of ladies in there not dressed
properly and this young man just put his
head down and closed his eyes and kept
walking to his car now I wasn't focusing
on him but I just caught my eye and I go
that's amazing you don't see much of
that around these days so this is called
doesn't want to take it to the next
level because he knows if you take the
next level something else is going to
happen Allah when I was about 9 years
old I'll share this with you my father
told me Boba when you become 14 you're
going to start getting sins if you do
the wrong thing but right now you don't
get sins as a
child I said what do I get now he goes
now you fill up your bag get a big bag
so that when you turn 14 you got a big
head start start GNA take long for your
sins to catch up so fill it up right now
I said and if I do sins he goes well if
I don't teach you I get the sins I'm G I
don't want you to get the sins because
then don't do sins so I went and prayed
two raas and said oh Allah in a room I
was 9 years old still remember said oh
Allah make me die before I'm
14 I said oh Allah bring me death before
I'm 14 I going to go straight to
J after that every time my father would
tell me dad 144 I would
say well i' go here there I just listen
I won't be here you know it's don't need
to hear this stuff he wants to teach me
about puberty I go move on so then I
turned 14 as you can see I'm now over 14
reached reached puberty I think and then
I
go I'm
14 so I went and made another du
said oh Allah every time there's an
opportunity for har any girls around me
oh Allah do something to make it so
awkward now I don't know it's because I
said the Dua that whenever that that did
happen cuz we didn't have Muslim schools
in high school my time we had primary
schools that were Muslim private schools
but not secondary schools they were all
public schools you know how they are and
we're talking back in the I'm going to
Rel my reveal my age we're talking about
about just the the you know the early
early '90s maybe even the late ' 80s '
89 1989 so
um Subhan Allah we were there and uh
every time truly you know there was a
bunch of boys or girls around me was
only in year seven year eight it will
always get awkward and I was known to be
the Widow the awkward Widow the
nerd one day we were we were in a class
where we were drawing about to the
ancient uh ancient the Greek mythology
and you know Zeus and all the gods and
everything that they believed in and I
refuseed to draw a God right God you
know they say you got to draw your own
God so one day I kind of the Shan got to
me and I go man I'm always not wanted
how about I just I'll just draw a fire
and call it a god
suddenly the girls in the class I became
popular to them because they liked my
drawing said oh is that your God what's
it called and it's a fire god and I go
yeah and suddenly I'm famous and all
good then I go this this my dad told me
about so I ripped and put it in the bin
neck
minute I'm not popular
anymore I I still remember these I don't
know if it's happened to
you I have a lot of stories about that
actually I shared them with my kids it's
good for you to share these things and
say how Allah keeps you aware and if you
are with Allah Allah will be with you
every time it got awkward you know so
I think it's from Allah tala
nevertheless we work together on it
alhamdulillah so work with your creator
to keep you guided and protected
inshallah
so is a very important boat for you and
once it's gone your life you're lifeless
that's why we feel depression and too
much anxiety and a bit some of us feel
empty and then we want to fill it up
with superficial things and some of us
our is so so
low that they feel the only way to
fulfill their needs and their somehow
their self-esteem is to go out with
someone is to have someone who
apparently loves them but they don't
they don't really it's not when you say
love love has to be in the Halal way not
in the Haram way that's the Shan's love
that's something else that you're
throwing yourself into so brothers and
sisters ha is life and it will pay off
insh in this world and in the next and
finally I say that Allah subhah waala
say that
Allah Allah is
modest he loves to cover up the faults
of
people so not only so a modest person
covers up their own faults a modest
person doesn't like to show off their
faults you don't go out and tell people
about your sins you're don't comfortable
with it unless there is a benefit
somehow but you don't tell people about
your sins you don't you're not proud of
it and Allah is he loves to cover so a
person who has modesty also likes to
cover the faults of others too they
don't like their faults to be shown and
they don't like to expose other people's
faults this is one of the characteristic
of a modest person catch it if you know
a person like
that that's a good friend that's a
person who
remind you of Allah number two Allah
says he loves to cover for people's
faults when one of you goes to wash
themselves to bathe um do it in
privacy the Hadith was about a time when
Prophet was going to the mosque and he
saw from a distance a man who had his
clothes off who was naked and having a a
bath at a distance away from people cuz
in those days they didn't have bathrooms
in that so he went to the mimar propham
spoke in public it doesn't do want to
expose him and he said if one of you
wants to bathe do it in privacy away
from the eyes of people some people take
this literally and they think you're
laugh when you bathe you have to have
clothes on it doesn't work like that you
got to clean yourself but the the idea
is keep privacy don't let other people
see you I say to um parents train your
children about ha for example at a
particular age where you yourself tell
them like you you show them how you
respect their privacy so you knock and
so on if you're going to change your
clothes even if they're like four or 5
years old don't change in front of
them unless unless you're covered
underneath properly but don't change in
front like some of them some parents may
say well you know a father may be
wearing really short boxer
shorts don't don't show the thigh if
you're wearing long you know long ones
just above the knees that's fine uh
maybe you know mothers whatever wearing
make sure that you know you practice
practice modesty in front of your
children to keep that going inshallah by
the time they're seven or eight
especially that age modesty has to be
increased and as I said you role model
it show it you do it yourself and they
do it for you and you teach them to
knock at a young age when they went to
enter Mom and Dad's bedroom and so on
you know what I
mean if swearing and abusing don't take
it as as a macho thing that oh I swear
that means I'm cool and everybody likes
me no that's IM modesty that's a sign of
a person number one who hasn't got a big
vocabulary so they they don't really
know how to talk and number two they
don't how Express themselves and number
three they're really lacking modesty so
in front of your children going to make
sure about these
jokes you know next time your child goes
and swears at school remember did you
swear in front of them did you say
something children embarrass us we've
all been there I've been there isn't
that right we've all been there so very
important brothers and sisters
Al is a core value of our Dean and some
of us are more than others if we have
fallen into these mistakes constantly
repent repentance covers the sin just
like Adam and
haah when they repented from disobeying
Allah and falling for the tricks of the
Shan for listening may Allah preserve
you and bless you bless your lives bless
your children bless your dignity your
modesty your integrity and your self-
resect and protect you from all harm
from within and from
without may Allah protect our brothers
and sisters destitute in festine and
everywhere around the
world this brother is asking about the
positions meaning the uh fine details
the jurisprudence of intermixing or
interacting between opposite genders men
and women so if they're children and
haven't reached
puberty you know obviously the
interaction is the boundaries are much
much
less um if you have reached puberty and
the other gender hasn't reached puberty
depending on their age again the
interactions are much less you know so
physical contacts not Haram but there is
still boundaries however once both of
you have reached puberty even if he or
she is your
cousin if they are you got to learn who
are the mahs and who are non- Maham
Maham means those who are forbidden from
you being alone with them in a closed
private room number one a nonaham is
also a person person who you are allowed
to potentially
marry and that includes your uncle's
wife you might say oh but my uncle's
wife your uncle's wife is you are not
Maham to her because you know in
circumstances let's say she was young or
something you would be able to marry her
if she was a widow for example or
divorced so even though you're not going
to marry her but the thing is that she's
not a Maham so anybody can potentially
marry number three you're not allowed to
see their hair if they're a female uh
have physical contact with them some of
them onid for example parents tell them
don't worry your cousins your cousins y
hug and kiss cousins oh cousins and
sometimes people get married and they
have to and they have a culture where
the son and daughter-in-law have to live
with the in-laws and then they say well
you your brother-in-laws are like your
brother they come in and see you without
a hijab this is all Haram so these are
important to know
secondly as you saw in these examples
from M and the young ladies and we have
Le examples in the of the Prophet
sallallahu alaihi wasallam where there
was interaction between men and women
there was talking verbal talking between
men and women women spoke in front of
men and men spoke in front of women and
men and women spoke to each other we
have a time where the Prophet sallallahu
alaihi wasallam used to give a private
session for women just for them and he
would answer their questions and teach
them and one
time entered and the women got up and
went behind the veil which indicates
that they weren't behind the veil but
obviously they were all
covered but when they went behind the
veil and they went quiet and he heard
them raising their voices like they were
asking the prophet wasam questions after
questions and he said uh and and
wasallam smiled and he said y Omar
you're amazing even thean gets scared of
you if he if you take a path the Shan
takes another path and he said to the
women how dare you fear me more
than now you're all quiet but you but
you're all racing each other to ask him
questions and they said to him yeah well
because you Omar you're
harsh that's why we're quiet with youmi
wasallam is you know easy going gives us
time so what why did I say this story
this is an authentic um narration shows
us that there is some degree of
interaction if there is benefit and of
course there are condition so the hijab
has to be worn
properly the interaction has to be in
need for it there has to be a benefit
for it and only what is needed should be
said you can also be kind uh and say
kind words but not beyond that inshallah
so obviously our brothers and sisters
have to feel safe and and uh and
respected among each other we don't put
on a harsh voice right that become
that's you know you can keep on a normal
voice but Allah tells us not to soften
our voice and not to make it uh
flirtatious and unnecessary to the point
where it can give the other person
impression right uh to be seated in a
respectful way if there is a need uh so
they interacted in business they used to
go to the markets women would go past
men would go past so if there is a need
it's not a strict situation of no no no
everything is Haram no but obviously if
there is no need the best thing is that
men and women are separated where there
is no need as much as as you see in know
in the Masjid for example women pray at
the back men pray at the at the front
not because men are more superior but
because of modesty and no men or women
of Muslims ever think oh when men are
praying in the front that means they're
better no no it's a modesty issue I
don't want to go into details because of
different postures in Salat and to give
respect to our sisters some of them need
to leave some of them have children and
so on so the interaction is as such now
sometimes you may have family where you
interact and you're not mams for example
your brother might be married and your
sister-in-law comes in to visit your
your parents are there you're there are
you allowed to sit in in the loung
room from a a perspective
of yes if there is respect if there is
uh a boundary that is respected if the
words are are full of respect if the
hijab is maintained then that's okay I
don't know of of any Scholars who said
it's Haram but what is better what is
better is segregation better but we live
in in a practical world where you know a
lot of our families they do mix it's
going to be very hard you know you can't
you can try but in circumstances you can
be respectful with each other there's
nothing wrong with that so obviously uh
Islam is not too extreme in the sense of
no absolutely no words absolutely no
sight and at the same time it's not too
lenient so it's somewhere in between I
hope inshallah this in summary this
actually needs a lecture to talk about
in more detail but uh in a nutshell this
is how it is now the wives of the
Prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
they're a little bit different there was
more strictness on their behavior with
the men
says he said to the women of the Prophet
wasallam do not soften your voices
because the men who have an ill
intentions or sicknesses in their heart
will get the wrong impression The
Scholar said this applies to the rest of
the women because the prophet's wives
are Role Models but to a lesser extent
not as strict and as serious for the
wives of prophet Salli wasallam
obviously women should not be flutatious
and soften their voices in intending to
give intending to be flirtatious so for
example and the wives of the Prophet
sallam used to speak with men from
behind a veil so either they would they
would be covered from head to toe even
their face everything you can't see
anything of them but used to give
classes to the men she is the greatest
female scholar that our Scholars and
jurist have ever spoken about and
F but the likes of them and she used to
after prophet's death in meca and in
Medina she used to set up a place and
put veil in front of her like a screen
and she would speak and teach the men
and answer their questions and go back
and forth and study you know this or
that so as you can see there's some
leniency and it's not you know life goes
on inshal as for the gays the Quran says
uh oh oh
um um oh messenger of Allah oh prophet
of Allah tell the believing men to lower
or to guard their gaze I won't say lower
is a little bit different to lowering
and when we say lower I think you know
what it
means means
to
withhold part of their gaze what does
that mean it means if there is no need
to look at a woman and a woman to look
at the man to talk then in normal
circumstances guard part of your gaze
why because you still need to walk in
this the streets you still need to go
and come you're not going to be a blind
person bumping into poles and things
okay that's absurd so you keep walking
normal but don't gaze at women so the
eye caught him keep moving on Allah
didn't say don't look he said you cover
your your sight as much as you can and
if you andam said the first look is
yours the second one's against you uh
it's uh not you so and a person just
move on but when you're talking together
there's
and Allah knows best looking at each
other while talking if there's a need
depends on the situation right so the
best thing to do is you look and then
partly sort of not look and look and
partly not look uh but uh it depends on
the situation so looking at a person and
talking to them to make something clear
is okay but if you can guard your sight
every now and then then that's good but
don't make it sort of because you know
when we say lower your gaze lower and
you take it literally and sometimes you
may be in a job or or or or some any
kind of uh interaction where a man and a
woman may need to talk to each other as
we're living in the west this is what
happens it's very it's impossible to
avoid it so sometimes a woman's not
dressed appropriately and there's a need
to talk to her you have to in a
situation it's better to look in at her
eyes than looking downwards or anywhere
else because they're not dressed
appropriately so sometimes you got to
look at the situation there is Allah
says
says fear Allah as much as you can you
know Islam is not an impractical
religion it doesn't tell you to be
invisible and Allah knows
best uh look about the about the seeing
right because some people I know they
need more explanation so I'll just give
one example theith is inkari where wasam
went to the um in when he went to do his
the pilgrimage in mekah when they opened
meca when they took over mecah and with
him was
um
Al he was a young boy young man probably
about 16 or so 17 maybe and a woman came
out and she spoke to the prophet
wasallam she spoke to him and wasallam
speaking to her and the companion
describes said the narrator of the
Hadith says the young lady was
attractive she looked nice she had a
nice face which means that she had
uncovered her face and that they looked
at her and she looked at them how did
they look at each other was respectful
well is looking and is's answering her
question but at the same time Al who is
Al was next to him he had no purpose of
looking at the girl at the lady so
Prophet s wasallam would just keep
talking to the lady and then he he he
would put his hand on the cheek of Al
and just move it away then he would keep
talking and then he would look back at
her cuz she was attractive and then
Prophet keep talking and just move his
face away very subtly and the young lady
she first looked at Al and then when she
saw that he moved his face away she
understood very quickly more than
Al men will be men right so she
understood cuz women have a bit more
emotional intelligence than men in this
situation in this situation something of
our brain blocks so have to remind him a
few times
but without making it such a big deal oh
my God he looking should be never
mentioned it ever to him again but what
I'm going to tell you is that there was
looking right so they can see each
other's faces they're talking to each
other but there's a benefit but whoever
didn't have a reason to look subtly and
and easily and softly told him to look
away and when she noticed that she
stopped looking at him I mean from the
first straight away so she stopped so he
didn't tell her cuz he doesn't want to
embarrass her being a female but he
could touch Al and move him because he
is you know a young man so all of this
indicates to us some level of a balance
and a level of practicality so that we
can get along in our lives okay I hope
inshallah that gives you a summary of
course there's much more to talk about
but I don't want to bore you out with
too much
talking very good question very very
good
question
said it's a long
Hadith it's a long Hadith but in the end
he
says if you have no sense of Shame no
sense of modesty then do as you
please
it's
saying that modesty is everything that
if you don't have a a sense of shame or
modesty then nothing will stop you from
doing the immoral
things no command of Allah no fear of
Allah no talking about Hellfire no
talking about Paradise nothing only the
law capturing you and putting you so
this is a very good question and
actually part of my talk today truly if
you don't have any sense of Shame and
morality and decency and
modesty saying do as you please meaning
really I can't do anything for
you no words from me no actions no
practice no reminders
are going to reach this person's head or
brain or or
heart like I told sometimes I see people
they just lost the plot no shame nothing
and I've been a teacher for a long time
we've had students like that you know
they pass a phase we called the jahi
stage in lianes you go past the
ignorance stage some of them at 14 15 16
they just don't register and the shame
there has gone down depending on who
they're hanging around with theyve got
really bad friends and they've done
Haram things Subhan Allah the sense of
morality is just dead in them no matter
what you say how many detentions you
give them how many meetings you have
with their parents no matter what you
give them what
advice nothing works so that's the
meaning
that it's not saying if you have no
shame do as you please me you got a free
green card no and it's almost like a
threat but not really so doesn't
threaten but he's saying to
you modesty without modesty you can't
move forward you're going to do all
immoral things nothing's going to change
you so just do whatever you want because
this person if he stays that way and
dies that
way there there's a a very high chance
they're going to end up in the
punishment in Hellfire because they're
going to fall into so many Haram things
and never repent because they have no
shame very good question I really like
that question and yours as well masallah
so what would you yeah so let's combine
that question If a person has found that
they don't have a sense of Shame
advising them is going to be very
difficult but I can't tell you what to
advise them exactly everyone's got a
different personality your trick your
challenge is to know this person what
are the angles from which you can
approach him
with is it through light-heartedness is
it through Sports is it through trade is
it is it through going out is it through
hanging out is it through bringing him
to the mask is it through through
talking whatever it is find what
interest they have usually I I always
find from students that I've taught that
if you can find out an interest an
interest or a hobby that that student
has I used to approach them from that
angle so if a student for example loves
talking about soccer a lot and all these
I'd go and research about soccer players
and I would come back and just sort of
make out like you know mention a few
soccer players and we connect so then
that person would listen so the idea is
try and find which angle works best with
that person person because not not
everyone works with lecturing not
everybody works with reminders once
wasallam exited the Masid and he saw a
man who was so angry and infuriated that
he was swearing and chucking tantrums
and saying words and the man is just
angry and everybody's trying to calm him
down nobody could calm him down wasallam
he looked at him and said if this man
says his anger will dissipate because he
could see the Shan Propet walked the
other way why because in that moment
that man is not going to respond the
more you talking to the angry is's going
to get so just keep him away from harm
why did I say this you got to understand
the approach of that person so you're
saying if someone is your cousin for
example and close to you then now your
your job is to try and see okay let me
see from which angles I can approach
this person and maybe throwing in a few
words maybe praising someone for their
efforts like I remember telling some
friends you know you know bro honestly
I've been a friend with you or a cousin
of yours for this many years and and if
there's any there's one thing that I
really have to say to you I like this
particular quality about you people work
well when you are honest with them and
sincere about some good qualities that
you mention in them and then suddenly
they they
listen there is a book called um there's
books about communication one of them I
always mention it it's written by a
non-muslim man but in the 50s but really
it's of of it fits well I can write the
a equivalent of the prophet am and just
match it where it's called how to make
friends and influence people D kaniki
and it talks really about how to reach
people and how to win their hearts over
so in in a way where it's respectful and
good so maybe read a book or look at
ways of how to approach people I think
that's a big big lesson for us to learn
about people emotional intelligence
people their mindsets how to approach
people very important inshallah all
right one more question and
a person has self-reflection and they
want to increase their modesty well look
self-reflection is part of modesty
alhamdulillah that's that's amazing so
when you do self-reflection what do you
do you catch yourself with one or two
things that you're not happy about
yourself
with write them
down memorize them I think writing works
just two things and then make a goal and
say these are two things I would like to
catch myself with and hold myself back
when the time comes then I would pray
two raas and say oh Allah this is my
goal be my support and assist me on the
journey it works wonders once you make a
goal and you focus on what you want to
improve on one one at a time or two
maximum work on it for about 40 60 days
catch yourself on it and you'll find
that your brain channels your neuron
channels start to shift Subhan Allah
naturally and then it becomes second
nature to you yeah so you got to catch
yourself and exactly what you said
reflection write them make a goal catch
yourself improve one by one you relapse
a bit make some errors eventually it
becomes a habit so practice it's as
simple as that very good
questions I think it's time